---
title: "Coversight"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2025-09-13-coversight
excerpt: 'This paper focuses on the role of audience costs in demanding Congressional oversight over foreign policy.'
date: 2025-09-13
venue: 'Journal of Experimental Political Science'
slidesurl: ''
paperurl: ''
citation: ''
---

A growing literature in political science examines the role of interbranch oversight, and the tension between its objective purpose of holding leaders accountable and its subjective application to serve partisan ends. There is no greater theater for this tension than covert foreign policy, where executives might take unilateral action to defend their interests abroad and risk the wrath of those kept in the dark domestically. However, this literature presents a puzzle: while observational work shows that leaders try to avoid getting caught, experimental work demonstrates that the public does not have an aversion to leaders acting secretly. Motivated by these disparate findings, we study voters' reactions to the resulting legislative oversight of a covert operation. Using a preregistered and well-powered survey experiment with a 2x2 factorial design, we show that the legislators' audience (their in-party voters) overwhelmingly prefers public investigations into covert operations when the operation fails. When the operation succeeds, though, the preference is much weaker. This empirical finding is important: when the president acts secretly, an opposition-controlled legislature falls into an especially advantageous position---the legislature can condition its response on the success or failure of the president's action. We show experimentally that the legislators' voters demand punishment for the president, given the operation's failure. This dynamic has important implications for foreign policy---while covert actions will inevitably continue, Congress and other power-checking bodies are given every incentive to thoroughly and theatrically investigate foreign policy failures, and faced with considerable consequences if they do not.
